Welcome to the next
week of our course
on parallel functional
programming with Java.
This week's lessons
continue our coverage
of Java's completable
futures framework.
As discussed last week, the
completable future class itself
consists of over
60 public methods.
And it also has two
dozen nested classes
that provide a wide range
of features, some of which
are basic, and some of
which are more advanced.
We start by discussing
the basic features
of Java completable future.
These basic features are nearly
identical to those defined
by the Java future
interface, which
the completable future class
implements and augments
slightly.
After describing these basic
completable future features
and showing an example of
how to apply them to develop
a simple asynchronous
program, we turn our attention
to the advanced completable
future features,
including factory
methods which initiate
asynchronous two-way or one-way
computations without requiring
programmers to use
threads explicitly,
completion stage
methods which chain
together dependent
actions that process
the results of asynchronous
computations when they
complete, exception methods
which gracefully handle errors
that arise during
asynchronous processing,
and arbitrary-arity
methods which
return a single
completable future that
can be used to wait for any
or all completable futures
in an array to complete
their processing.
Since completion stage
methods constitute roughly 2/3
of the 60 plus public methods
in the Java completable futures
framework, we devote the
bulk of our time this week
to exploring them.
These methods can
be grouped together
based on how a
stage is triggered
by one or more previous stages.
In particular, some
completion stage methods
are triggered upon completion
of a single previous stage.
Others are triggered
upon completion
of both of two previous
stages, and yet, others
are triggered upon completion of
either of two previous stages.
Getting a handle
on all the methods
in the completable future
API takes time and patience.
So we present plenty of
small, yet complete examples
to illustrate the
structure and functionality
of many key completable
future methods.
These examples are all available
in my open source GitHub
repository.
So I strongly encourage you to
inspect and run them carefully
to ensure you
understand how they work
and how you can apply
them effectively
in practice, both through
your programming assignments
and beyond.